All right. Good afternoon.
Okay. Now we are going to continue on
the 37 practice of bodhic sattvas. Um,
we are on the second
vers
and it is
this one is attachment to love ones
circus like Other
hatred towards enemies burns like fire.
Ignorance of what to do, what to adopt
and what uh uh abandon is like darkness.
Giving up your homeland is the practice
of bodhic sattas. Do you like that?
given up your homeland
like me
is the practice of bodhicatt. No.
Okay. This is what we call second
preliminary practice.
We had first uh the precious human life.
Right? Now this is the second
preliminary. It is um eliminating the
three poisons. Okay. Attachment, anger
and ignorance. Right?
As a beginner, it is difficult to apply
um the direct sort of antidote to these
um strong afflictions.
Um so the best solution is at the at the
beginners like us beginners stage is uh
to avoid the conditions that gives rise
uh to these negative afflictions. Right?
Um
some circumstances
allow these emotions to arise in our
mind easily.
Right?
Most people have a great deal of
attachment
and aversion
when they um remain in the area where
they were born and grew up.
So much tome
uh points to such circumstances
is the homeland
a source of these
negative emotions.
For that reason he suggest
giving up homeland and
disturbing places.
That is why
Buddha
left his homeland. You remember that?
Many practitioners
encounter obstacles
in their
spiritual journey due to their
attachments
to their family
to their friends.
So
as a beginner practitioner to avoid
situations that give rise to afflictions
is the best way to do it. And um
overcoming this these these emotions is
an important goal of a bodhic satta.
Um so I think there are three ways of
understanding giving up your homeland.
The first is um
actually giving up the place where you
were born like Buddha, right? Um
however, giving up your homeland
doesn't always mean that you must
abandon where you were born, but you
must abandon any place
any situation
which causes disturbing emotions.
That is the
um second way. Give up your homeland.
Uh you can give up any place that causes
you um disturbing emotions
and um
um
hard to practice
all these distractions.
Uh that's the second and then the last
the third and
the deeper meaning
is to eliminate these emotions from our
mind
which we can
view as the homeland of samsara.
So there are three ways
you can given up your homeland.
Uh
now the first line here refers to
um emotional attachment.
Um when we have a strong feelings of
attachment to to
loved ones that can disturb our practice
a lot.
It's like water with the waves
crashing one after another with no peace
in between.
That's what Tommy said here, right? The
second line describes the disturbing
emotions of hatred towards enemies
which can also destroy your spiritual
practice.
It says it burns like fire. Fire can
destroy everything.
Right? So it's burns like fire.
And the third line here describes the
disturbing emotion of ignorance.
Our minds easily
fall into their habits and confusion.
So we don't know what to adopt
um and what to abandon when our minds
are
controlled by ignorance.
disturbing emotion and that can destroy
our practice. So therefore to is kind of
warning us about our homeland, right?
Because that can be a source of
the disturbing emotions of attachment
and anger and ignorance.
So
you know there are three ways you can
understand giving up homeland.
Um that's that. And then the third verse
given up negative places. Disturbing
emotions gradually diminish with no
distractions.
Virtuous activities naturally increase
through clear awareness. Certainty and
the dharma arises. Relying on solitude
is the practice of body surface.
So this this verse describes
good reasons for giving up your homeland
that was mentioned above.
So this verse gives three reasons why
uh solitude is in in a appropriate
lifestyle of the bodhic sattas.
The first reason is
disturbing emotions gradually diminish
when you avoid negative places.
Your mind has the space to calm and that
makes it easier to let go of harmful
emotions.
So practitioners
should abandon that place
which causes a lot of emotions to arise.
Okay, that's the first second reason for
seeking solitude is that uh your
meditation will naturally increase
with no distractions.
Distractions
can prevent
you from uh focusing on positive actions
like meditation.
Distractions make it hard to engage
in positive actions such as practice of
meditation.
Right? Atisha
said um until you have attained
stability
distractions harm your practice.
By stay in solitude you will be able to
devote yourself entirely to practicing
the dharma.
That's the second reason. And then the
third reason for heaven solitude is that
it allows your awareness to develop and
your mind to become
clear so that
certainty and confidence in the dharma
will arise in your mind.
Once you have understood
the essential point of the teachings and
instructions, you will experience
no difficult with um practice and your
your efforts will bring you joy.
And with understanding of the truth of
dharma,
your mind is free from doubt.
hesitations, confusion.
So the essence of learn
is uh
reflection and the essence of reflection
is meditation, right?
Learn reflecting
or concentrating and meditation.
Meditating
So if you can sort of uh manage to put
yourself into a full state of awareness
then good actions and positive uh merits
accumulations will increase
and everything become easier easier.
Um this is just an
external way of looking at solitude.
But
what is really important is the solitude
of the mind, right?
Not necessarily outside
solitude of mind. In Buddhism,
what we need to overcome is
um
not adverse place outside but rather an
inner mind of negative emotions. So when
we can practice in this way all uh
problems will gradually sort of u
elim diminish.
If you leave somewhere
where there is um less distraction
then you have time to think
and reflect.
So
in your daily life
um
let's say um choose a few things that
you enjoy doing
instead of trying to do everything right
because this gives you time to observe
your mind to reflect on the dharma
and to a play it to your mind.
So do something that
you like to do
and then meditate. You know, for
example,
um you know, eat something you like to
eat and then meditate. Go for a walk and
then meditate.
Read a book then meditate again. So do
something you really like then after
that meditate a little bit then do
something then meditate that's how you
like develop your effort your diligence
and connect to the dharma your
meditation not necessarily okay I
meditate more than three times and then
I'm done during the day that's fine too
but I like you know you do something
then meditate you reflect on that what
you did. Maybe you did something wrong.
Then you understand, oh, I did something
wrong. I will not do that again.
Meditate, reflect and then do something.
Go for a walk and how when you see
people, how did you react? Do you react?
And maybe reflect on that. Oh, maybe
that's not good. I will not do that
again. And then meditate. It's really
nice. So that's how you bring your
meditation you know into your daily life
and then it will change your actions
activities and become like really nice
and positive and
um that's how you sort of increase your
dharma practice in your daily life. Um
so
anyway in essence this verse uh
encourages a mindful practice
and cultivates inner peace,
clarity
and certainty about the path of wisdom.
So as a Mahayana practitioner the
purpose of finding a good place is to be
able to meditate and generate
bodhicitta.
That's the essence of this verse. Okay.
So I'm kind of like explaining you a
little bit not in detail because we
don't have time but just give you the
point each verse and then um if you want
you can make notes.
Now the next fourth verse is
Legend.
Close friends who have been together for
a long time will part from each other.
Wealth and possessions gain with much
effort will be left behind.
Consciousness
a guest will leave a guest house of the
body. Letting go of this life is the
practice of
bodhic sattas.
The first verse of um 37 practice deals
with the freedoms and advantages of
precious human life. Right? And this
fourth verse is about uh impermanence
and death.
So usually you see like these two verses
come one after the other in the um
teachings right when you think about
precious human life. Oh this is very
precious but at the same time it's very
impermanent you never know. So we just
went after another. Uh but here in
between these two verses
there are another verse describing the
practice of abandoning in negative
places. We just talked negative friends
rely on solitude right? This is because
when you
understand the precious human life on a
very deeper level then you will decided
to make this life meaningful. Right?
To do so
as a beginner we need to find a good
environment that can help our practice
increase develop.
That's important. That's why to explain
once you really understand the precious
of this life you don't want to waste any
time you want to do something while I
have this great opportunity good human
being precious human life I want to do
something I then that is like your
practice but in order to practice I need
to find a good place
less distractions.
That's why he put it between this um the
this verse, you know, and uh first and
the this is this verse is impermanent.
So now this this is the fourth right
this is fourth preliminary fourth
preliminary practice is giving up the
the
concerns of this life by reflecting on
impermanence and death.
So this verse deals with the nature of
life which actually is not the way we
usually see not the way we usually
understand life.
So the first line here mentions our
relationships.
No matter how deep
or how long the connection is, the
separation is inevitable.
It's just a matter of time
whether through changing circumstance
or death or something happened. Right?
So recognizing impermanence
encourages us to appreciate the
relationship
without clinging to them.
That's so important. Don't take this
like negative way. But if you really
understand in deeper level you know I'm
talking you know impermanence of life is
really
um gives you sort of appreciation the
you appreciate the relationship
with your friends and whatever.
Uh and then the second line of this
verse mentions wealth and possessions.
Right?
Again no matter how much
uh
we attach to our wealth everything is
going to separate
from us eventually right therefore
the best antidote is to be satisfied
with what we have right now right if we
have
little attach ment to things in ordinary
life we will have a better life
that's very important
then the third line mentions death
for see most of us here
half of our lives are already gone right
like myself
even if I live
let's say up to 80
more than half more than half my life is
already gone
each day pauses and that brings us
near to death each day each minute each
second right bring near to death.
It's like an an animal being taken down
the road to slaughter. Each step it
takes brings the animal near to its
death. It's like us, you know, it's like
that. In fact, no one know when our
lives will end. It can be any moment. It
can be.
So it says our body is like guest house
and consciousness is the guest.
Letting go of attachment whether to our
lives or relationships,
wealth or
even one's own life is the main part of
this practice.
completely.
So we should understand this
the relationships and wealth we have are
not the problem.
Sounds like this teaching you know our
relationship and wealth we have is a
problem. It's not that the problem
right? The real problem is having
attachment to them without satisfaction.
That's a problem. So if we are content,
satisfied,
then our mind is really
at peace.
Even if we have very little,
if we don't have contentment,
satisfaction, then no matter how much we
have, we will be unhappy.
Contentment is
teachers say real wealth and happiness.
Satisfaction is the real wealth.
So if you have satisfaction, you are
just millionaire.
So we don't need to abandon anything. We
don't we only need to let go of
attachment to these things.
That is what we need to focus on in this
verse. When you practice this verse
and heaven, satisfaction and contentment
is what is important to do
cuz it brings happiness,
less worry, less stress.
People who are very satisfied whatever
they have and they always say I'm I'm
happy. I'm good. I have everything.
Even though they had not much but you
know teachers say that if you are
attached to these things you are not a
true dharma practitioner.
If you are attached to your own
self interest you don't have bodhicha
mind.
So anyway, in summary, this teaching
encourages us to practice detachment.
That's why it says here, letting go of
this life
is the practice of bodhic satta.
Letting go of this life means letting go
of attachment
and We can.
So that it means like practice
satisfaction. That is the real wealth
and happiness. Believe me, I think you
know I can see all my teachers and all
these great teachers how they satisfied,
how they happy.
Now the next fifth verse it says
When you associate with evil companions,
your three poisons
grow stronger. Your activities of
what? Hearing, right? Hearing, thinking,
and meditating decline. Your loving,
kindness, and compassion are destroyed.
abandoning such companions is the
practice of bodhic sattas.
This verse deals with uh connections and
associate
um associations with bad companions
or
uh misleading companions. Okay.
M told me talking about us the
beginners, right? beginners, child we
call I call child bodhic sattas,
right? beginners. Otherwise, if you are
if you are genuine bodhis, so you have
real sort of
you have nothing but genuine bodhic
chhatta, you need to connect with this
negative people so that you have
capacity to help them. But child body
surface,
no. Right? So they will change, right?
They will take away our body cha mind.
So so much to is talking
here you know this verse um
associate with uh bad compan bad friends
or bad people you know
so how do we really know
who is good and who is bad for us how do
we know
in some situation ations it's easy to
know
but in most situation it's not easy to
know. So for this reason we should rely
on the explanation of these teachings.
So what exactly is a bad companion
that the first line of this verse says
who whoever makes your three poisons
grow stronger is a bad companion.
Poison harms whoever takes it. Right? In
Buddhism, the three major disturbing
emotions are attachment,
aggression, and ignorance.
These are called the three poisons.
Three poisons because they are always
harmful to us. Always.
So here
evil companions refers to people who
encourage negative behavior.
And when being close to someone makes
your negative actions increase
that person is considered a bad friend.
So the you know kadumba masters say that
they would not fear walking with a wild
elephant.
They're not afraid
but they would fear keeping the company
of bad friends.
Why?
Because all the wild elephant they're so
strong can cause your death right but
its negative influence is limited.
It cannot harm your future lives.
But a bad friend, evil friend harms
many of our future lives.
And of course, similarly, if we rely on
a good friend,
who has a kind heart, compassionate,
encourages us to practice,
then our good qualities will naturally
grow. Good qualities, right? Love,
compassion, bodhic, jitta, wisdom, all
this would grow.
So therefore
rely on a good friends is really
important so important. If you are if
you are beginner, if you are advanced,
you are not beginner, you then you need
to rely on uh not rely on communicate
with the negative people and help them
bring them into you know um bodhis path
all that. But um if we if you are
beginner then
your company your friend is so important
uh because whether you go down up it
depends on your friend.
Uh-huh. Then the second line deals with
um
what we as a practitioners need um which
are the qualities of hearing,
contemplating and meditating on the
dharma. Right? These are the methods for
um achieving enlightenment.
So we need to engage in these three uh
in Buddhism they call three knowledge
right three knowledge and uh we should
only rely on people who can guide us in
this way
and we should not communicate with evil
uh companions who uh influence our
energy
and shift our focus away from these kind
of practice.
So therefore it's important to choose
spiritual spiritual friends. That's why
belong to a sana community is so
important.
Then the third line deals with negative
influence
which can destroy our love and kindness
and compassion.
If you find that you are
under the influence of someone who
causes you to have less and less love
and compassion for others, then you have
to recognize
that this person is not your good
companion.
So you have to
slowly
um dissociate
with uh that person. You don't have to
abandon you have you don't have to
reject completely. uh if you do that you
are going to break your bodhisava
but you can keep distance
from this uh negative people that you
can't help them
keep that in mind
so
uh you know sometimes um Um
he go to the bar and then drink with um
alcoholics you know all this because he
want to help. He has a capacity to help
them slowly then you know but in order
to do that first you have to do exactly
what they're doing and then they think
oh this is a good friend we can do this
this then they believe you and then you
can slowly change their mind. Body salva
real bodhic salvas do that they have
capacity but we don't we don't have we
go there and drink and we drink more and
more right then it's hard to stop.
So if that's the case you have to slowly
sort of disconnect like you know with
that kind of people.
So as long as you don't pick up their
bad actions and follow their you know
behavior then they can't change you
right?
No matter
who that person is, we should not have
um attachment or hatred towards that
person. But we should uh use our um
brain
uh wisdom to think carefully and we
should use our
eyes to make good observation.
Um
so we have to
kind of like uh avoid being in their
company frequently
because they influence our you know this
fragile mind so easy to change right
and um
so those people um
discourage you or dharma practice and
then then doubts enter your mind and
slowly your
um inspiration goes down. That's why
teachers always advise that if you don't
wish for
suffering you must avoid negative
companions.
if you don't have capacity to help them.
So they always say if you wish for
happiness you must rely on good friends,
spiritual friends. So we should not
enjoy time with negative friends.
So the only way to check is whether your
love and kindness, your bodhicitta, your
compassion increases or decreases
through
connect with this people, this person
you know or whether your three poisons
right attachment, anger, ignorance are
increasing or
uh domination through the
contact with this person.
So
by checking this this this these things
you you would know who is good friend
who is bad friend right
you don't have to you you have to check
your practice
if your anger your desire or jealous
increase because of the connect
connection with this person then
something is not Right.
So for beginner practitioners, it is a
very dangerous to company
bad friends. Okay. Keep that. My teacher
always say this.
Um now the next the sixth verse.
Oh this is
when you rely on spiritual friends.
Your mistakes are eliminated.
Your positive qualities increase like
the vaccin
um cherishing spiritual friend even more
than your own body. Wow. is the practice
of bodhicattas.
This verse um advice
that we should rely on good friends and
we should uh tasure spiritual friends,
someone who has a good sort of effect on
us.
Again the great um teacher Adisha had a
few teachers you know and when he um
talked about um some of his teachers he
just uh
joined his you know his palms at his
heart
but when he talked about S langa you
know S langa who's from Indonesia Yeah.
Um he cried Adisha
and uh then um the Adisha students
asked him what's the difference between
your teachers?
You know some teachers when you talk
about some of your teachers you just jo
what is different?
He said you know Adisha said all my
teachers have the same qualities.
They all are good teachers.
But Sabba his his root teacher um he
went to Adisha went to Indonesia to find
Sumba. Oh he went through so difficult.
Um but eventually fortunately he he
found the sumba and um somba is more for
him adish sumba is more important
because of my bodhic jetta he said
I have a bodhic juta mind because of
sumba that's why
all my teachers they have same qualities
they all good teacher but I have
bodhicha because sumba so that's why
sumba is
when he talk about him is he just cry
uh
[Music]
so you know in the in the Buddhism you
know in sutras and tantras it talks
about all the different qualities of a
teacher
so many different qualities of teacher
but as Bram said the most important One
is
whether this teacher has bodhicitta or
not.
So we need to associate with a spiritual
friend who has a body cha mind a
compassionate
then no matter what
it will change and
uh we can develop our inner qualities
with that kind of spiritual Right.
So this is the opposite of the um the
last verse, right? Last verse don't
spend time with bad people. This verse
talk about you know like spend find a
spirit of good dharma friends and spend
time with them as much as you can.
So
it says cherishing spiritual friends
even more than your own body.
The most precious thing to us is what?
Our own body, right?
So
that is used as the example here because
their influence helps us
overcome our own
mistakes and faults and
and then our love and kindness
compassion increase. It says like a
vaccin.
So we should practice dharma in their
company.
In this way our practice will increase
and
by following the bodhic sattva practice
we must go through this process.
We must follow this teachings of bodhic
sattvas
in order to
uh develop our meditation.
We need to find all these um
circumstances you know that helps that
can help our meditation
and
develop our bodhicitta.
Once you have bodhicitta then no matter
what the way you say where you act way
whatever everything is positive
everything is dharma
when you don't have bodhicha then no
matter you
prostate like 100 100,000 prostations
nothing
a good exercise but other than other
than that nothing there's no merit right
okay
um take a break here and then
next section